$TITLE$
The Client-Server Based Distributed Oceanographic Data System:#
Report on the System Design

[*James Gallagher*] (Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode
Island, Narragansett, RI 02882-1197; ph. 401 792-6939; fax 401 792-6728;
Internet: jimg@dcz.gso.uri.edu); George Milkowski (Graduate School of
Oceanography, University of Rhode Island, Narragansett, RI 02882-1197;
ph. 401 792-6939; fax 401 792-6728; Internet: george@zeno.gso.uri.edu; Omnet:
G.MILKOWSKI); Peter Cornillon (Graduate School of Oceanography, University of
Rhode Island, Narragansett, RI 02882-1197; ph. 401 792-6283; fax 401
792-6728; Internet: pete@petes.gso.uri.edu)

Direct access to oceanographic research data is the main thrust of the
Distributed Oceanographic Data System (DODS). While systems exist that
provide location information about data in archives, few systems provide
direct access to the actual data. While CD-ROM distributed data provides
direct access, its production requires too much overhead for our ideal view
of the DODS. We envision a system which will provide access to the most
current version of a scientists data while at the same time requiring little
or no additional effort beyond storing the data on a computer. Paramount to
the success of the DODS is the participation of active research
oceanographers. To develop the requirements for the DODS we held a workshop,
sponsored by The Oceanography Society with additional funding support from
NASA and NOAA, where oceanographers, system developers and data center
managers contributed. The emphasis was on the oceanographer's research needs.

The basis of the projected DODS' design is the well known client-server
paradigm. DODS servers are located at each machine that has on-line data
which is made accessible to the system. The servers perform two basic
functions: data location and data access. While at the time of this writing
the design has not yet been finalized, we hope to integrate the data location
capabilities with existing network system such as the World Wide Web (WWW)
and/or the Wide Area Information Server (WAIS) system. In contrast to many
system, we do not envision data moved from the researcher's computer to a
central archive when it is added to the system. While the DODS will support
access to data held at a central archive, the DODS provides access to data
still held by the researchers who originated the data set. Users on any
connected computer use client software to search or access data on one or
more of these servers.

The DODS will provide access to data in a self describing form. Data may
either be stored in the DODS self describing format, one of a set of other
self describing formats or may be stored in the scientists own `native'
format. In the later case, server-side translators will transform, on the
fly, the native format data into a self describing data stream when it is
accessed by a client. The self-describing nature of the data stream accessed
by DODS clients provides a uniform level of documentation about those data
streams. In addition, the DODS servers support optional features which
simplify providing extra information about individual data sets. Because
these features are optional, data providers do not need to follow a long and
cumbersome documentation procedure to make data available to the community at
large. However, any additional documentation they do choose to provide can be
accommodated by the system, thus increasing the value of the data.


$INFO$

1.  1994 Ocean Sciences Meeting

2.  000133197

3.  (a) James Gallagher
        Graduate School of Oceanography
	University of Rhode Island
	Narragansett, RI 02882-1197
    (b) 401 792-6939
    (c) 401 792-6728

4.  OT

5.  (a) OT02 Data and Information System for Oceanography
    (b) 6339 System Design
	6620 Science Policy
	6344 System operation and management

6.  N/A

7.  None

8.  Charge $50 to VISA card 4784 8000 0100 2804 exp 03/95

9.  C

10. None

11. No
