Using DODS to Access and Deliver Remote Data

Ethan Davis, UCAR/Unidata Program Center
James Gallagher, University of Rhode Island
Tom Sgouros, University of Rhode Island


The Distributed Oceanographic Data System (DODS) makes remote,
scientific data accessible through a number of familiar data analysis
and visualization packages.  There are two sides to DODS.  The first,
making data visible to others, involves setting up a DODS data server.
Data servers are available for netCDF, HDF, JGOFS, and Matlab data.
Servers for other data formats are being developed.

The second side of DODS is to give the users data analysis and
visualization package the ability to access data served by DODS
servers.  Once the application is DODS enabled, data from any DODS
server can be accessed regardless of the format in which the data are
actually stored.  If either Matlab or IDL is available, the respective
GUI program that comes with DODS can be used.  Several common APIs
(e.g., the netCDF API) also come with DODS.  Applications that use
these APIs can be DODS enabled by relinking them to the DODS
libraries.  New DODS GUIs and API libraries are being developed.

This poster will explain and demonstrate the basic workings of DODS,
including requirements and installation.  DODS was first developed by
a joint collaboration between the University of Rhode Island and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  The scope of DODS has been
broadened recently with grants from NASA, NSF and NOAA.  The
collaborators include URI, MIT, JPL/PO-DAAC, NOAA/PMEL, NCAR/HAO,
UCAR/Unidata, AGU, GSFC/GCMD, OSU, U. Miami, Scripps, and U. Hawaii.
User support is being handled by Unidata.  For more information, see
the DODS web page at <http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/packages/dods/> or
send questions to <support@unidata.ucar.edu>.
