
	$Id$

PREFACE

This is a guide to installing DODS client software. This guide provides
general help that applies to all DODS clients. Some clients might require
additional steps; if that is the case there should be an INSTALL-<name> file
for that client either in this directory or in the source code directory (if
you down-loaded the source code) that provides any special information you
need.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

 QUICK INSTRUCTIONS

 INSTALLATION

 QUESTIONS

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

QUICK INSTRUCTIONS

Define a new environment variable DODS_ROOT to be the place where you
untarred the executables. Add the DODS_ROOT/bin directory to your PATH
environment variable.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

INSTALLATION

DODS client programs are regular Unix executables and can be installed in any
directory that is on your PATH environment variable. In addition you can run
the clients from you current working directory. DODS clients currently
require that a copy of the program `gzip' (GNU's freely available
compression/decompression program) be one your system and in a directory on
your PATH environment variable. Many systems already have this program; in
addition there is an option on both the DODS binary and source distribution
pages to get a copy. If you system does not have this program (you can test
for it by typing `which gzip' to see if it is in a directory on your PATH)
get a copy and put it in DODS_ROOT/etc or one of your system's directories.
Note that it won;t hurt to get an extra copy (the program is free and very
small) and put it in DODS_ROOT/etc even if another copy exists elsewhere on
your machine.

DODS clients also use some additional files for progress and status/error
messages. These files are located in the `DODS_ROOT/etc' directory created
when you unpacked the tar file and have the extension `.tcl'. In addition
you'll need a copy of `wish', the program that runs the Tcl files. Many
systems already have wish, to find out if your's does type `which wish'. If
your system does not have wish you can get a copy from the DODS binary
down-load page. Copy the wish executable into the DODS_ROOT/etc directory or
any directory on your PATH. As with gzip above, getting an extra copy of wish
won't break anything. 

NOTE: Always set the DODS_ROOT environment variable to the point to the root
of the DODS tree. If you unpacked the tar file in /usr/local, then set
DODS_ROOT to /usr/local/DODS. If you don't set DODS_ROOT, the software will
use the default value for DODS_ROOT which was set when the software was
built. 

To complete the installation the Tcl files and wish interpreter, define an
environment variable named DODS_ROOT to point to the directory created when
you unpacked the tar file (e.g., if you just down-loaded binaries for
DODS-2.13 and unpacked the tar file in /usr/local/, set DODS_ROOT to
/usr/local/DODS-2.13).

TIP: If you don't install the Tcl files and wish interpreter the DODS client
will still run, it simply won't use the popup status and message display
system. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

QUESTIONS

There are several sources of information about DODS:
The DODS home page: http://dods/gso.uri.edu/DODS
The DODS user's manual: Available at the home page.
DODS User support: email George Milkowski (gmilkowski@gso.uri.edu).

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

James Gallagher
jgallagher@gso.uri.edu