
$Id$

This file describes how to set up a dsp-dods image servers. 

Note: this discussion assumes that the NCSA World Wide Web server (httpd) is
installed on the workstation which is to be used to serve data. If that is
not the case first install the WWW server and then proceed. For information
on getting and installing the NCSA httpd server, see:
http://hoohoo.ncsa.uiuc.edu/.

To set up a DODS data server using the DSP image server implementation, first
follow the instructions in the INSTALL document. Four programs comprise the
data server: a CGI (dsp) which is used to dispatch each data request to the
correct filter program and three filter programs (dsp_das, dsp_dds,
dsp_dods). Make sure that the CGI module `nph-dsp' is somewhere where the
http server can run CGI modules (cgi-bin).

Data that are to be served by the DODS server must either be within the http
server's document root directory or they must be in files/directories that
are linked to files/directories within the document root directory. To find
out which directory is the http server's document root, look in the httpd
configuration file srm.conf.

For example, to make the file "east.coast" available to users it must be either
placed or linked within the document root directory. On my workstation
the document root directory is /usr/local/spool/http so the file must be
moved or copied to that directory or one of its subdirectories or I must
create a symbolic link in that directory or one of its subdirectories to the
file. I have created a directory `data' in the http server's document root
directory and copied the file "east.coast" there. The URL to that data file is:

	  http://dods.gso.uri.edu/cgi-bin/dsp/data/east.coast

Note that after the machine name (dods.gso.uri.edu) the URL contains the path
to the DODS data server CGI and that the path to the data (relative to the
document root directory) *follows* the CGI name.

